It isn't just that the movie is bad. I
think there's a moral dimension to its
badness. I'm Wesley Morris and this is
Cannonball today.
It's Michael.
Uh look, the movie's bad. Like really,
really bad. But like many a bad movie,
it's also a massive hit. And we're going
to talk about why. Also, we've got a few
suggestions for biopics that we wish the
people who made Michael had watched
before they went and made this one.
Sometimes when I'm walking around
outside, I'll encounter a very familiar,
extremely enticing aroma. It is the
smell of an oven, of baking bread, and
no matter what, I will stop in my tracks
and be like, "Oh my god, I want that."
That, of course, is the smell of a
Subway sandwich shop trying to reel me
in by pumping out its most comforting
fragrance. But there's a problem with
that tantalizing smell.
It's evil.
>> [laughter]
>> I thought about that smell while I sat
down to watch Michael,
the new biopic about Michael Jackson
that sigh, big, enormous sigh, was
produced in cooperation with the Michael
Jackson estate.
>> Just have all these songs in my head.
Just got to get them out.
>> The opening shots are just high-water
pants, white cotton socks pushed down
into a pair of black loafers, and I
could practically taste the smell of
baked bread being pumped out onto a city
sidewalk trying to seduce and disarm and
sweet-talk me into some food I shouldn't
swallow, into gluten I can't tolerate.
These loafers are praying on the almost
Pavlovian memories you have of those
socks and those pants and that hemline.
You know what those heels and those toes
and ankles can do? So, forget about your
qualms, your questions, your misgivings.
Just watch that man dance. Hee hee.
That is pretty much all this movie wants
us to do. We see Michael Jackson go from
about 10 years old in 1968 to about 30
years old in 1988. We see Joe Jackson as
dad take off his belt and beat his
little butt. We see him watch a lot of
TV with his mother Katherine. We see him
read Peter Pan before bed. We see him
rescue a chimpanzee from its own abuse
and exploitation. We see him go solo and
experience the stratospheric fame that
made him feel like part of everybody's
family. But mostly, what we see is
Michael Jackson once again sing and
dance. Sing and dance. Now, the movie
knows that we know about the allegations
of child molestation, about the trial he
endured over one of those allegations.
It knows a lot of us have seen the HBO
documentary that Dan Reed made in which
two men remember in vivid detail what
they say Michael Jackson did to them as
boys. It also knows that some of us
believe them.
But the movie ends before all that
happens. Instead, it goes to hilarious
lengths as in like laugh to keep from
crying lengths to provide an innocent
backstory for his relationship with
these children. The kids in this movie
are always accompanied by parents, moms
who really love them some Michael.
Or the kids are in a hospital dying.
There are so many sick kids in this
movie. He's like a one-man Make-A-Wish
Foundation. In its crazy way, the movie
is defending Michael Jackson against
accusations nobody in it is making.
This thing
it does not care about being a good
movie. It wants to be exhibit A in our
ongoing public trial of how to live with
our memories of this man by just giving
in to the familiar comforts of that
bread smell. It turns out that a lot of
us are more than willing just to do
that. We're like, "Make it a weekend
excited." It's been a week and Michael
is already a massive hit more than $200
million worth served. That I am told is
the best opening weekend ever for a
biopic. Sorry Freddie Mercury, sorry
Elvis. It's got a 97% audience rating on
Rotten Tomatoes. [laughter]
That's a higher score than
Casablanca.
>> Here's looking at [music] you, kid.
>> I got a little preview with this
audience energy the day I went to see
Michael. I was sitting next to a couple,
a man and a woman, and there's this
moment where Michael's lawyer, who's
played by a wig-wearing Miles Teller.
>> You want to be the biggest star in the
world?
>> That guy turns to him and he says,
"You're a legend. There's nobody like
you. There'll never be anybody like
you." I don't know why I'm making this
guy a gangster, except he is. He's one
of the people who helped make this
movie. Anyway, the woman in the couple,
that woman, while he's saying this, she
just she was just tapping her finger
against her thumb and just said,
"Facts."
Facts. Now, look, I'm not trying to
argue with her, but this movie is giving
us facts we already know. We all agree
upon those facts. The bad dad, the
wrath, the champ, the chart domination,
the skin, the nose, the hair, the belt
buckles, the loafers, the socks, the
global fainting spells at the live
shows, the stardust. I wanted to believe
in the Michael Jackson this movie gives
us, but this guy's not a person. He's
like a cartoon of genius in this movie
and you know, an ATM for the estate. The
movie is the definition of fan fic. It
asks nothing of us and it gives us only
the man of our dreams and our memories.
And look, I get it.
Times are dark. We are hungry for
something engineered to make us feel
even hungrier? This movie is all too
happy to keep giving us bread and
concerts. I couldn't just sit alone with
my feelings here. I had to talk to my
friend Eric Hynes. He's the director of
film programming at the Jacob Burns Film
Center in Pleasantville, New York. He's
also one of my favorite people to talk
to about movies, [music] and he's been
talking to me about Michael Jackson for
a quarter century, and
>> [laughter]
>> I figured he's the perfect person for me
to ask, "What is going on here?"
Eric Hynes?
>> Wesley Morris.
>> What's up?
Welcome.
Um let's just let's just go right in.
>> We're here for a reason.
>> What is this movie?
>> [music]
>> You're confident.
>> Why does it exist?
>> You're strong.
>> Why is it happening?
>> You're beautiful.
You're the greatest of all time.
>> I really, you know, from the minute it
started,
I just felt bad.
>> Mhm.
>> I could feel
somebody's strings pulling me up this
way,
and they're going to make him dance, and
they're going to make me dance to his
dancing.
Go on.
>> Well, I mean, it exists for IP, right? I
mean, it's sort of that simple. It
exists to
consolidate an asset, and to promote an
asset, and to make sure that that asset
is safely profitable from this point
forward. It feels that way from the very
first frame.
>> Just your language.
>> [laughter]
>> Well, that's I don't like this language.
I don't want to spend any time with this
language, but this is what this film
exists for. But it's funny, like you you
like I didn't you know, I felt that from
frame one, too, and yet I also found
myself, despite myself, not liking it,
but wanting it to actually show me
something, [laughter] tell me something.
>> I was really
looking for a
>> Yeah, an insight, a story.
>> I mean, because it was made by all these
people who know him, who claim to know
him, who claim to care about him. There
are brothers and sisters in the
executive producer credits. I don't know
if you caught this, but Harvey Mason
Jr.,
who runs the the Recording Academy, the
people who give out the Grammys, he's an
executive producer. The Grammy
organization is thanked at the end.
Like,
it's just wild. So, I was assuming,
or hoping, there'd be some kind of
I don't want to go so far as to say
revelation,
but just some
insight into
our understanding of who this person
was.
>> But even that is too risky for what
they're trying to do.
Um, but it's interesting that you could
say there could be an approach to the
way that this is written, the way this
is directed, so that anything
controversial or problematic or
worrisome or human could be entirely
avoided, but instead, it suggests these
things. It kind of knows that you know
them.
>> Yes, yes, yes.
>> you an opportunity or allows you to feel
like it's okay.
He's a weirdo, but it's he's kind of it
makes sense. You understand why he's a
weirdo.
>> [laughter]
>> You understand why he doesn't have any
friends, so it's okay that he has a
chimp. It's okay that, you know,
>> Wait.
>> [laughter]
>> Back back up. I actually want to sit in
this arrival of Bubbles moment.
>> Sure.
>> Because it is truly in the world of like
a real family,
this is something that we'd all have to
sit down and discuss.
You know, Michael has furnished us with
this lavish
residence. We all live on this compound
together.
>> Mhm.
>> And now our landlord
>> [laughter]
>> has imported a chimp that he, by the
way, has saved from abuse and
exploitation.
>> Mhm.
>> He, Bubbles,
I can't believe I'm saying this knowing
everything I know about the way black
people have been talked about in this
country, but Bubbles is a mirror.
He is an avatar for Michael's own
suffering. If he can't be saved, he can
at least save this monkey.
>> Mhm.
>> Just, woof. But the family is just like,
"Oh, you know, that's Michael."
>> What's the say, the way that the family
reacts is like different strokes or
something like that.
It's It's It's just like, "Oh, there
goes Arnold."
>> Mhm.
>> Yeah, I mean.
>> [laughter]
>> He's a little eccentric.
>> Gary Coleman, by the way, does make an
appearance on a TV. They are watching
Different Strokes on TV at some point in
this movie.
So,
you're talking about like hoping for a
revelation or an insight, and I feel
like the movie
is like suppressing all revelation and
insight, and then revelation kind of
squirts out anyway.
>> Sure.
>> I am thinking about
the Well, I mean, let's just talk about
the agenda of the movie, right? Because
I believe there was a version of it that
in that in that was supposed to include
some acknowledgement in its last act of
the allegations of child molestation
against Michael Jackson that took place
in 1993.
>> And that was taken out because of legal
reasons, because that plaintiff couldn't
be represented.
>> In any sort of work of, you know,
fiction
depicting Michael Jackson, he could not
be depicted as well. Um, fine.
>> And I feel like almost everything
regarding young boys or young kids in
this movie
>> of the reshoots?
>> No, was actually building towards
whatever it was actually going to do.
Cuz now it's just kind of there. Now you
throughout the film you get whenever
there's an opportunity for him to visit
with sick kids or to sort of like, you
know, connect with a young person, he
does. And then it's just kind of there.
It's so strange cuz I feel like that
makes sense if you're kind of seating us
to the idea that he's going to be from
the film's point of view incorrectly
>> Somebody's going to try to take
advantage of the
>> no, but he's really doing that. Now it's
just kind of you know, it's just an odd
thing to include at all when you're not
going to explore it at all.
>> But now it feels like an admission of
something, right? Now it feels like a
defense against a thing that we also
remember about Michael Jackson.
>> Mhm.
>> There's just so much myth-making here
based on what we think we remember about
this man. But I'm like, well, what about
all these other stuff I remember?
And
>> that you remember that's not [laughter]
there, yeah.
>> I remember Janet Jackson.
>> Well, here, come on.
>> Who she? Who she in this
>> I when I reached out to you when I saw
this before [laughter] you had a chance
to see it and you said, "Wait, I got to
see it first." All I wanted to talk
about
was Janet Jackson.
>> Was the D Jax the D Janet the D Janeting
of the Michael Jackson movie?
>> We can't spend the entire time on this,
but I could because it doesn't make It
is like one of the most ridiculous
things I've ever seen a movie do, which
is to take one of the most famous people
on the planet
and basically pretend that she does not
exist in the family in which she would
to which she was born.
>> Now
>> It's insane.
>> To be fair to Janet
>> kid The kid The Jackson kids are all
there, [laughter]
but Janet
doesn't ever exist in the world of this
film.
>> I guess she didn't
want to be involved in the making. I
don't know what involvement would have
entailed.
Um there are different camps in the
family apparently about like supporting
the existence of this thing.
>> Yep.
>> Some of his kids are fine with it, but
one of his kids is not.
>> Yep.
>> These are all sort of extra narrative
things that really don't have a lot of
bearing for me on the text of the film.
And in the text of the film, as you say,
this very famous person is not there.
But to be fair to the text of this film
>> historical figure.
>> None of the brothers are distinguishable
from each other, Eric. Can you tell
Jermaine from Tito from Marlon from
Randy?
>> No.
>> I mean
>> Yeah.
>> I I can't.
>> you can sort of glean about
>> But I mean the other siblings who are
involved are perfectly willing
to be erased for the sake of whatever
payout
>> [laughter]
>> uh royalty comes their way as a result
of this, you know, trip to the ATM. I
really can't tell these brothers apart.
And I think that
it's all in the purpose of serving
Michael Jackson's specialness, right?
Like we all see our own individual
identities to the brilliance and
importance of this man because we in the
audience
we didn't come for Tito.
May he rest in peace? That's not why
we're here. We didn't come for Janet.
It's called Michael. So if you came for
Janet, that's on you, but
>> [laughter]
>> I didn't come for Janet. I just want her
to be acknowledged that she's a
person that
>> Right. But it it is indicative of the of
the corners this movie is willing to
cut.
>> Sure. Sure. And and knows that it can
get away with it. Well, can we talk
about the family a little bit? I'm
curious about There's something about it
seems to really as much as this is about
Michael Jackson, the most famous person
on the face of the earth, we all know
everything, that's also kind of like
concentrating on the family for a good
portion of the film.
>> In this life
you're a winner or you're a loser.
You all want to work in a steel mill
like me for the rest of your days?
No, sir. Yeah, cuz I sure was hell no.
>> Is it like attempt to make this a
representative family? Is this a
representative black family? Is this a
representative black father? There's
something about this that feels like
familiar to me because of biopics, but
also because of portraits of black
families, that feels like should this be
familiar? Is that okay that it feels
familiar?
>> Uh
I think that
you know, there's that The Jacksons
Family movie which came out in the early
'90s
>> [music]
>> really does a
I would say memorable job. Um it is
iconic
in that its iconography involves Joe
Jackson's unending abuse of these kids.
>> Yeah.
>> You messing with me, boy?
>> So.
>> Oh my god.
>> [laughter]
>> BOY, YOU CRAZY.
JOE, COME ON. COME ON, JOE.
>> [laughter]
>> AND THAT IS the lasting impression that
movie left at least on me. Um
and that it basically could be used to
explain any number of things about what
befell Michael Jackson and what Michael
Jackson
choose chose to do in the wake of living
in that house with Joe Jackson. So, Joe
Jackson doesn't have to go full on
Ike Turner here. He can just be like Joe
Jackson flavored as played by Colman
Domingo, who does with hair and makeup
go all in.
>> I need to think.
I told you with the bank.
>> Um so, rather than torment Michael
Jackson about how he looks, we just get
one line where Joe is like what does he
call him? Big Nose? Go away, Big Nose.
Or shut up, Big Nose. That's it. And
that's enough to like plant the seed in
our minds that yeah, Joe Jackson's the
problem here.
>> Mhm.
>> Um Margo Jefferson
wrote this great book called On Michael
Jackson
in which she does a lot of speculating
about things that happened to Michael
Jackson that had nothing to do with Joe
Jackson's abuse, but includes it.
But it also has to do with like how
Michael Jackson developed a sexuality at
all. Um how he came
into his own as a came into his own as a
sexual being. Like how he learned sex,
essentially. And that's compelling to
me. I think that the Jacksons don't
really
represent a typical black family because
they're not.
>> [laughter]
>> You know, I think that the attempt to
make this a sitcom about people living
in a house together, this movie's
attempt to turn that relate those
relationships into a sitcom
um with a little bit of dramatic tension
is interesting because
it really, really, really, really
requires you
to to just not care about what stick
figures everybody else is. And it's not
like Michael Jackson's a fully
completely developed person, either.
Um
he just goes in stained glass. Everybody
else sits in a pew.
I mean, can we can we
talk about the one good music sequence
in this movie? The one interesting music
sequence in this movie?
I think it's the Beat It moment.
>> great. No, it is really good. I mean,
it's it's a fable.
>> Yes.
>> But it's it's a pretty good sequence.
Yeah.
>> Why did it I mean, if it works, why does
it work it?
>> Well, I mean, cuz it's it's a sort of
thing where
stretching the truth or not, it's an
incredible thing to say we're going to
bring in like the Crips and the Bloods
into a
>> [laughter]
>> into a into a sound stage, and we're
going to like dance it out.
>> to we're going to work out [laughter]
decades of gang violence and animosity
with a little bit of choreography.
>> And and and they're going to just like
think that Michael's the coolest.
>> Yes.
>> Yes. Yeah.
>> The looks of awe
>> Yeah.
>> on these guys' faces
>> is is extraordinary.
>> [laughter]
>> But I mean that whole sequence is
interesting just because
something is happening.
>> Yes.
>> Like Michael Jackson one night looks up
at the news. I believe he's in the
studio where his his second home. But
anyway, he looks up at a TV at some
point and sees that there's, you know,
it's it's another it's a story about
black men being shot and killed. He sees
this and he's like, "Oh, it's so sad.
It's, you know, black-on-black crime.
Terrible."
Goes to bed, I believe. Wakes up because
he can't sleep
alive with inspiration and then suddenly
there's he's in the studio
and the camera is zooming along the
control board as he has a revelation.
I believe he makes a phone call.
>> And then what happens?
>> [laughter]
>> Um I think he makes a phone call to
folks who got some connections. People
he know he knows that might know some
people on the street.
>> The streets. And they bring together in
a
sound stage Bloods, the Crips, [snorts]
all the breakdancers, all the kids from
the streets and they get together and
they dance it off.
>> I mean, it's extraordinary cuz Michael
Jackson is leading this I'm going to
call it a community dance class.
>> [laughter]
>> And it also is the Beat It video.
>> Right.
>> And it also is the Beat It song. It's
all, I mean, again, like we've like this
we'll say it again, this is a fable of
how a song got written.
But it feels good in the moment because
it's so ridiculous and it is yet another
group of people signing a petition they
did not know they were signing because
the Bloods and the Crips need lawyers
and they too should have some say in how
they're depicted, but whatever.
>> Yeah.
>> They're on board in this movie with with
Michael Jackson having these moments of
inspiration.
>> Well, and there's there's yet another
layer of characters who are just there
to just marvel at Michael. That's kind
of their only function is to marvel at
Michael.
>> Just be like,
"Oh my god.
This guy, you know what? Gang wars off.
>> [laughter]
>> It's off. You know what?
>> And and history
>> Let me take out my I'M DONE.
WE'RE DONE. [laughter]
MICHAEL FIXED IT.
WE'RE OUT. I'M beating it.
>> History says that's where it all ends.
>> [laughter]
>> Dennis Hopper never had to make Colors.
It just ended right there.
>> We want a uniform presence out in the
street. They're flying their colors,
we're flying ours.
>> I think the memory exploitation that's
happening here is the thing that is hard
for me.
Um because I be Well, because
>> I'm curious about that term memory
exploitation.
>> It's a very powerful thing and I can't
think of another person with whom we
have this kind of relationship where
it's, you know, until 1988
was mostly positive. You know, even
beyond 1988, when Dangerous comes out,
he is trying to get out in front of
all of the things that that that are
gathering in the press about him. And he
without really asking us to defend him,
defended him, right? Like I mean, there
was a huge part, especially among black
people,
>> [clears throat]
>> there was a real,
you know, we've been down this road
before.
We've seen needless persecution. We've
seen people dragged through the mud.
Not Michael.
>> [laughter]
>> They can't They can't do this to
Michael.
And it was also a little easier because
it seemed like the people accusing him
of, you know, the abuse were white
families.
And one of the things that makes that
Leaving Neverland documentary that the
estate which is responsible for this
movie
tried, you know, they have essentially
they sued and got it expunged from HBO.
No longer is watchable through HBO
streaming service.
Um one of the things that's powerful
about that movie obviously is like the
amount of time and care spent in
getting these two men to tell the story
of their relationship to Michael
Jackson. And it goes from like the
happiest most um
mind-blowing time spent with this man to
the memories of the dark turns it took
with respect to
the allegations of sexual molestation.
And they're very graphically explained
and laid out in the film in Leaving
Neverland.
I remember hearing those and kind of
understanding
how at least a kid could get involved
in the life of Michael Jackson.
Um I don't know if you had this
>> Because cuz you were a kid and you were
enraptured by Michael Jackson.
>> I loved him.
>> Sure.
>> And if Michael Jackson somehow found his
way to my front door
>> [laughter]
>> I'm letting him in. And I think my
mother probably is, too.
>> Right? And you think that he could be
your friend.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean and
>> And he'd be safe.
>> There are so many photograph I mean just
kids were such a part of the Michael
Jackson experience.
>> But that those things also bring up and
I I I don't understand I don't I don't
get I don't know if I know the personal
history here. I don't know what this is
based [clears throat] on with this
bodyguard figure.
>> And do it, Michael.
>> Not a little BOY ANYMORE.
>> OH, YES. I'M GLAD YOU BROUGHT HIM UP CUZ
I almost forgot. He's present in every
single scene.
>> He's like maybe the number two character
in the film. I don't know, is that based
on somebody?
>> I think he's a real He's probably a
composite of a couple people, I believe.
I don't want to I don't remember now,
but I know that there was a person cuz
the cuz both James Safechuck and or Wade
Robson talk about this figure in Leaving
Neverland. They talk about this guy. Um
and they talk about a man who I believe
is this bodyguard.
>> Yeah.
>> And he just The other thing That's
another thing that kind of spurts out
the more the movie tries to like
repress. It's giving this guy more life,
time,
uh personality than a than a Janet
Jackson, right? And so
it also makes you wonder what else this
guy would have seen, what else he would
have known, where else he would have
whisked Michael Jackson into and out of.
>> Mhm.
>> You know, like
who who was he opening the doors for?
Because he was
he was in the house. He was at
Neverland. But yet here he is as a kind
of like
human Kevlar, you know?
>> Mhm.
>> Um I don't know. This movie is so weird.
For as bland and uninteresting as it is,
>> Yes.
>> you know, it's just there's so many
strange things about it.
>> I like what you're saying like the kind
of pressing down on it things kind of
squeak past. It's sort of like the idea
of like the more they try to hide things
from us, the more visible it becomes.
>> There are more shots of Peter Pan than
there are Katherine Jackson.
>> [laughter]
>> There are more loving shots of Peter Pan
than his own mother. Okay, so, you know,
this isn't working for you.
This is not working for me.
You know who it is working for?
>> Yeah.
>> Millions of other people.
What who's who's bad?
>> [laughter]
>> Is it us?
>> Uh
no. No. I actually I'm I'm proud of
our friends in the critical
establishment, people who are writing
about this film, for not taking the bait
of anticipating that this is going to be
a big popular film and try to find their
way to kind of endorse it in some way.
It's I'm I'm proud because it's it's so
it's not surprising that this is a huge
hit.
>> No.
>> Um but I am somewhat surprised by how
unified the criticism has been
um because I think it's appropriate and
it's not easy.
>> You mean when you say unified, you mean
that it isn't just that the movie is
bad. It all It's like I think there's a
moral dimension to its badness.
>> A moral dimension to its badness?
>> But also a kind of real like identifying
what it is, addressing it, and taking
the film to task for it. Um even though
it's this kind of juggernaut that's
going to be massive. Um so it's it's one
of these moments where you could say,
"Oh my goodness, the people have spoken.
They're right. The critics are just
killjoys." Like no, the the critics are
actually doing their jobs and everyone
else is just kind of wants to just
tune tune out the kind of problems and
enjoy the hits. And that's kind of what
people do.
>> Just play the hits, man.
>> Yeah.
>> I just want the the feel-good parts.
>> Cuz we all we
we want to feel good about our
childhoods. We want to feel good about
ourselves and what we feel when we
listen to that music. I get it. It makes
sense. I
I These songs mean a lot to me. Like
those memories mean a lot to me, too. I
don't want to feel like I can't have
them.
But there is a way of doing this film
>> [laughter]
>> that allows you that
>> Yeah.
>> while also acknowledging that there is a
complicated figure that you may not
entirely endorse. The idea that you're
going to somehow just think that he's a
cuddly weirdo and a genius and that's
why you get to enjoy the music is
that you're you're going too far. You
don't have to do that. And at that
point, you're really actually
aggressively trying to undo the truth
that a lot of people have suffered from.
And and that's why I think we're also in
this kind of era where which is
terrifying cuz we're I think we're
living in a government that sort of
believes this
that you if you have enough money and
power, you can sort of make something
true even if it's not
>> Well, that's where the estate comes in,
right?
>> The estate is basically And the fact
that this documentary can't even be seen
in America because they've kind of
legally made it so that it goes away.
You can kind of make these inconvenient
truths go away.
Um that's what's insidious. Um I think
that we're capable as a society, as a
culture, of
holding to holding the things that
matter to us without then becoming
you know, um
you know,
uh glorify a figure like this.
>> So, all right. I I cannot speak
for tens of millions of people.
>> Yeah.
>> But I think there's probably a mix of
feelings among the people who are going
to see this film. I think overwhelmingly
a lot of people really do just probably
want to not think about
anything other than this imaginary
Michael.
>> And the film allows them to.
>> Right. Right. It's the thing.
>> Whether or not they want that, they're
getting that, and they're okay with it.
>> So, but they also don't know whether or
not they how they would feel, right? If
they went to see a version of Michael
where, you know,
Jordie, or, you know, one of the other
kids who was part of that trial.
Um
were part of this story, right? If you
also got your
Beat It moment, and your Thriller
moment, and your Bad moment, and the
constant juxtaposition of like having
the audience at some point sing the
words themselves to Human Nature?
Um
but the movie's not asking us to hold
two things in our minds at once.
But that in some in some ways like I
it's it's lowest common denominator.
It's easy. It's like no one
actually really wants to think about
these things. No one wants to think
about what Michael Jackson did or may
have done or the things that um
that are not, you know, uh wonderful
about Michael Jackson. No one really
wants to think about that. So it's to me
it's not even that pro- I mean like it's
just let's give the best version of this
guy we love then we want to be able to
love him and you're giving us an
opportunity to love him. Great.
Like it's not to me it's like
>> [laughter]
>> you could you might also walk away and
go, I know it's kind of a myth. I know
it doesn't get into stuff. I know I
don't that doesn't sit that well with
me.
>> could be people who were leaving the
theater right now.
>> I'm I you know, but I'm also glad that I
got to just sort of appreciate the
things that are great about Michael
Jackson.
>> Right.
>> And the film is allowing them to do
that.
>> I also think it's important because
you're you, um and you know, one of the
things one of like a a huge aspect of
your
of your interests, Eric,
is non-fiction filmmaking, right? Like I
mean you have a deep knowledge, great
passion for,
a real commitment to the
ongoing proliferation of and engagement
with non-fiction filmmaking.
Is there a part of you that goes to a
movie like this and
sees the ways in which it is violating
all kinds of
I don't know, truth-oriented approaches
to this person and think
oh, and this is also happening at the on
the grave of a very good piece of
non-fiction filmmaking.
>> Right. Right. Yeah, no, I mean I think
about
I think it's probably be one of the
reasons why this mode, this genre, is
one of the least interesting and most
distasteful for me.
>> I agree.
>> Is you're talking about the movie
biography, the the so-called bio
>> biography. And in in relation to what
you're saying in terms of like what can
documentary do is documentary can
complicate things. Documentary can take
a moment and provide more nuance and
facets to somebody to puzzle over who
somebody is, puzzle over what to think
and what to feel and what happened.
Whatever those might you know, whatever
the approaches might be for documentary,
whereas the biopic is sort of just
picking
picking a version and going with it.
>> But that said,
>> Mhm.
>> here we are with a Michael Jackson movie
that is like, you know, the most popular
movie on the planet right now.
And
neither of us likes it, but I do wonder
if there are ways in which it could
the next time somebody
>> [laughter]
>> the next time the estate decides it
wants to take another bite of the apple,
I don't use that metaphor loosely,
what could it do? What forms could it
take?
I was watching Michael Jackson's movie
and I was just like, you know, what I
kind of miss, and you're going to not
like to hear this,
>> [laughter]
>> I kind of miss Gandhi.
>> WOW.
OKAY.
>> I miss the 4-hour
mega movie about one person's effect on
humanity.
>> I am a Muslim,
and a Hindu, and a Christian, and a Jew,
and so all of you.
>> Big old mega movies, yeah.
>> I miss the soup-to-nuts version of a
person's life that lasts for 4 hours,
has a great director, a lot of
interesting moments, a lot of boring
moments, but you're being taken
somewhere.
>> And it's also because there's more to
it. There's there's more breadth.
There's more stories. There's more
points on the kind of chronology that's
being covered.
>> Michael Jackson can with I mean, you
could really get into some business if
you go soup to nuts.
You know what I mean? Like Katherine
Jackson gives the birth
and
everything else takes over and we we
we're there with him that terrible day
in 2009 where it all it all ends.
>> Sure.
>> And we go on this amazing journey that
takes some twists and turns and lasts
for 4 and 1/2 hours. But but we will
have gotten somewhere powerful and
useful and I I wonder
>> Yeah. It's hard to dispute that that
would not be compelling. That would be
really compelling. There's a lot to
cover. But that's the last thing that
this film is going to do. [laughter]
The last thing. It's about a mission.
It's about how do [snorts] we not
include like, you know, half the
alphabet. We have to somehow not include
half the alphabet. You can't go soup to
nuts.
>> Like I mean, this is like
>> [laughter]
>> this is like
P through R. Like what are we doing?
This is Um all right. Well, then what's
another model that theoretically could
work for the Michael Jackson story?
>> Well, another one would be the Todd
Haynes approach. Um either either the
Superstar the Karen Carpenter story
which is a truly truly great film and a
great way of solving for this or I'm Not
There. Superstar the Karen Carpenter
story, of course, is this incredible
story
you know, story about um Karen Carpenter
and all told through Barbie dolls and
voice over acting.
>> [music]
>> And it's incredibly powerful and
beautifully told.
>> Karen?
>> Where am I?
>> You're in the hospital, dear.
>> You collapsed on stage.
>> Another film that sort of caught up in
legal issues because of the music and
because the estate was not happy with
the end product. That's kind of why
we're in this era now where we only can
have estate approved projects. But is a
actually incredible portrait of
sympathetic portrait of Karen Carpenter.
>> is one of the Well, that's the other
thing, right? There's a heart to that
movie.
Um
it is honest about her life
and the use of the dolls both amplifies
and destabilizes while also weirdly
humanizing this person. The other thing
that's great about that movie with
respect to doing it for Michael Jackson
is
there were the dolls.
>> Yeah.
>> He had his own Remember the Remember the
song?
>> The song?
>> It's Michael, Michael
You don't remember the song for the
dolls?
>> [laughter]
>> Remember the song for the dolls?
>> His feet got the beat. He's cool [music]
and he's neat. It's Michael.
>> Go Michael.
>> It's Michael, Michael. And it would be
like, you got THE GLOVE, YOU GOT THE
SOCKS, YOU GOT THE LOAFERS, you got the
pants that don't fit but fit, you get
all of it. It's Michael. Anyway.
>> I love you, Michael [music] Jackson.
>> Uh and then there was I'm not there, the
Bob Dylan uh
>> I think that's a great use of of trying
to figure out how Michael
>> This kind of fragmented fractured
portrait where a different actor plays
Bob Dylan in different areas of his
life.
>> [music]
>> It's interesting to think of that being
applied to Michael Jackson would be in
some ways yes, it would be how his
persona has evolved, but it'd be I think
a lot more
about us and how we respond to him and
the relationship we have with him in
different eras.
>> I love this idea. Okay, I've got a very
hot example in terms of like no one
would ever touch it. But like what about
just doing the Mommy Dearest version
>> [laughter]
>> of Michael Jackson?
You know, Mommy Dearest of course being
>> It sort of does it moments.
>> In my house the great Joan Crawford
movie biography as told mostly from the
point of view of the two children she
was not very good to as a mother.
>> NO! WIRE
>> [screaming]
>> HANGERS!
WHAT'S WIRE HANGERS DOING IN this closet
when I told you no WIRE HANGERS EVER!
>> WHO IS MICHAEL JACKSON IN THIS?
>> HE'S JOAN! What are we doing?
Oh, but you know what, Eric?
[clears throat]
What if it was Mommy Dearest but Michael
was all of the characters?
>> Oh, wow.
>> [laughter]
>> THAT'S GREAT.
>> I DON'T KNOW HOW IT WORKS.
>> I DON'T KNOW HOW it works.
>> it.
>> But like he's everybody. He's everybody.
I mean listen, the estate the estate's
not going for it.
>> No, the problem also is that Michael
Jackson famously cannot be anybody but
Michael Jackson.
Have you ever seen Michael try to act?
[laughter] I mean I mean yes, he's
actually pretty good in The Wiz. I like
him as the Scarecrow. But come on. Have
you seen Moonwalker?
>> You'll see what I can do.
You'll see.
>> I mean come on.
>> Oh, no.
>> act. He wanted to be Fred Astaire. He He
really thought of himself
>> but he but I mean the thing about
Michael is that I mean not only was he a
collaborator, I mean he is one of the
great appropriators of all time. Like a
human synthesizer. If he I mean the
funny thing about this movie is he's
like looking at Do we see him watch
Singin' in the Rain for like a
nanosecond? We see there's James Brown
on in the background. All the people he
stole from and was inspired by.
>> I would have I would yes, I would have
given up every reservation
that I have for the Michael film if
there is a scene where Daryl Hall
>> [laughter]
>> where he approaches Daryl Hall and says,
"Can I take the beginning of this song?"
>> [laughter]
>> Don't do it. I can't go for that. And
turn it into Billie Jean. We should just
You know what we should do? Ocean's
Ocean's 15 [laughter]
where Michael is just ripping off all
the banks of the great stylists and
singers. How is this sounding really
good, Freddy? This is a I think this is
going to be a hit. And everybody loved
it. That's the thing cuz he would do
something with it. Kenny Loggins? I mean
I mean listen, talk about reparations.
>> [laughter]
>> Michael was on it before we even had a
word [laughter] for what to really
really call it.
But I mean again, like there just so
many interesting things you can do with
this man that are not moral
immoral denials of reality. Um so just
keep that in mind as you stay as you
proceed
making your money You mentioned in this
man's name. Gandhi. Um and I think there
was like Lawrence of Arabia, there's
Last Emperor as these kind of epic
versions. Yeah. What is there a one
that's more standard that you actually
do like cuz it kind of works on those
terms? Is there one that works for you?
one. What? La Bamba.
The Ritchie Valens story. I love that.
>> In 1957,
Ricardo Valenzuela had his family,
his talent, [music]
and a dream. [music]
>> Cuz La Bamba is kind of a miracle that
it exists. You know, it's it's like this
sort of written directed by this kind of
like legend, this sort of uh Latino uh
Luis Valdez who was kind of a poet
playwright and uh and had a small moment
where he somehow got the gig. It doesn't
make any sense.
>> But wait, but talk about why that movie
works as a model.
>> Probably works because it's coming from
a place. It's coming from like
Californian
Latino experience,
um Chicano like art and uh culture that
yes, it winds up having this package of
biopic, but it feels real. It feels
authentic.
>> important to say too that we had
forgotten about Ritchie Valens at this
point. Right? This movie kind of
reignited an interest in his music. So,
it kind of all of it comes from nowhere.
The director, the stars, the music, and
the man.
>> And then made hits out of these songs
again.
>> [music]
>> So, there's that that's the one that
think I think of. Anything that you
think of that's like a along those lines
that you kind of
>> beat that.
>> I mean, I think there's a I would love
to see the Michael Jackson movie that
just talking to Martin Bashir or Diane
Sawyer or Oprah Winfrey. Just do the
interviews. You don't need the estate's
permission for that. That would be
extraordinary to me.
>> Truly. Yes. Okay. I think we we arrived
somewhere. That's That's what we're
looking for.
>> Put You can send your checks
>> [laughter]
>> to 620 8th Avenue,
uh care of Eric and Wesley Morris,
please. Um Eric, we did it.
>> We did it. Thank you so much.
Yeah.
>> And we we we cried.
>> to. We got through it. We [laughter] can
We can move on with our lives now.
>> All I want to say is they don't care
about you, Michael. [music]
That estate can say what it was. They
don't care about you.
Um thank you, Eric.
>> Thank you, Wesley.
>> Woo!